Beyond Photoshop with Code

1. designing with code

artists should understand and surpass the limits imposed by their software tools ( or tools in general)

tools that democratize ability can also homogonize output

"The tradition of artists creating their own tools is as old as art itself;
for centuries, artists ground their own pigments, plucked pig hairs to make
their own brushes, and primed their own canvases with glue made from boiled
rabbits. Instead of distracting artists from their "true purpose", these
crafts actually tightened artists' connections to their materials and process.
The revolution in software tools over the past decade, by contrast, has
disastrously diminished the intimacy of this practice/practitioner
relationship. Our tools, created by anonymous engineers for nobody in
particular, are mass-produced, mass-distributed, one-size-fits-all. And all
too often, we have no idea how we might make such a tool for ourselves, even
if we wanted to. In this essay, I hope to convey the idea that artists can
still make their own tools. The territory has largely shifted from paint to
code: so that is where we must go."
- Golan Levin

for 3 years I avoided actually learning how to program.


Wassily Kandinsky's Point and Line to Plane (1926)
Gyorgy Kepes' Language of Vision (1944)
Paul Klee's Pedagogical Sketchbook (1923)

Add Maeda to the timeline


The simple fact is that in visual design, there are no right answers—we have
nothing to rely on but our own raw talents and our own practiced eyes. In the
realm of software engineering, by contrast, nearly everything one might care
to know about or use is available and documented in a book. Programming,
computation, engineering: everything you wish to know is already out there,
waiting for you to seize it. May you already possess the talents that can't be
taught, so that you may learn and use well the ones that can. 


understanding media 1997 McLuhan

To McLuhan, "hot" media are high-definition, high-resolution experiences that
are "well-filled with data," while "cool" media are low-definition experiences
that leave a great deal of information to be filled in by the mind of the
viewer or listener. Within McLuhan's scheme, therefore, photography and film
would be examples of hot media, while cartoons and telephony would be cool.
McLuhan's definitions establish an opposition between the "temperature" of a
medium and the degree to which it invites or requires audience participation:
hot media demand little completion by their audience, while cool media, "with
their promise of depth involvement and integral expression," are highly
participatory. 

The notable property of cool media, I believe, is that they blur the
distinctions we make between subject and object, enabling the completion of
each by the other.

My personal criteria for interactive media begin, therefore, not with the
question "for how long can I suspend my disbelief in it?" but with the
questions: for how long can I feel it to be a seamless extension of myself?
and to what depth can I feel connected to another person through it?

To answer these questions well, an interactive medium must become a kind of
prosthesis, a participatory information-prosthesis which is so intimately
adapted to us that our awareness of it drops away when we engage with it. To
do this, we must rethink what it means for a medium to be personal, for a
defining feature of our modern era is that nearly everything we touch or
experience is impersonal and canned. "Canned" is my word for it, anyway; one
might equivalently describe much of the world around us as pre-prepared or
mass-produced. Few aspects of life have been spared from this depressing
homogenization.

It is therefore ironic that computers—as mass-produced putty-colored boxes,
the most quintessentially generic items of all—have the most unprecedented
potential of any technology to break this trend of homogenization, and respond
to us in ways that are uniquely individual.

To create engaging interactive systems which can sustain our interest over
repeated encounters, I believe we must eschew canned materials in favor of
creating interesting generative relationships between input and output. When
looked at in this way, the number of possible relationships and their space of
possible outcomes is nearly unlimited. No matter what form the user's input
takes—whether textual, gestural, auditory or what-have-you—we can imagine a
way in which it can be amplified, shrunk, sharpened, dulled, embellished,
simplified, stored, reversed, echoed, repeated, reflected, slowed,
accelerated, rotated, shifted, fragmented, merged, negated, transmitted,
transformed, transmogrified. Taken as a group, these augmentation techniques
can be used to present the user with feedback systems whose rules produce
surprising and engaging results. If they strike the right balance of
intelligibility, novelty and utility, the experience of incorporating oneself
into these systems can be deeply enjoyable and perhaps even socially
significant.

The creation of generative relationships in interactive artworks is most
hampered by the limited malleability of our media.

The finer our level of granularity, the more control we have, and also the
more work we must do to create interesting results. It's a tradeoff that I
truly believe is worth making. From the programmer's point of view, we are
faced with the choice of triggering something as simple as a "play" button, or
doing the hard work of developing a generative synthesis algorithm. But from
the user's point of view, we are faced with hearing the same melody...again,
and again...or hearing a sound which responds to our unique presence in the
world of information. 

Much of my own work has focused on the development of systems for the
real-time creation and performance of animated abstract imagery and synthetic
sound. Every environment I develop represents an experimental attempt to
design an interface which is at once supple and easy to learn, but which can
also yield interesting, infinitely variable and personally expressive
performances. In pursuing this goal, I've often found it necessary to use the
most malleable media possible, and in this way to build up my generative
schemes from first principles. Thus many of my pieces make extended use of
low-level synthesis techniques in order to directly control every individual
pixel and every sound wave displayed and produced by the computer. To complete
the feedback of the interaction loop, my systems chiefly derive their inputs
from human gesture. The psychological and physiological intimacy of the
relationship we have with our own gestures is surprising, and when our marks
are used to generate uniquely ephemeral dynamic media, it's possible to create
simple and transparent interactions which can nevertheless open new vistas of
possibility and experience. The pictures which illustrate this section are
stills taken from my interactive works, and give an idea of my systems'
expressive range.
